How soon are self driving cars [music]
coming to your city?
>> Self driving vehicles are here in
Minneapolis.
>> Phoenix and San Francisco, Los Angeles
and Miami.
>> Will the world be safer with [music]
fewer people behind the wheel?
>> a flight to catch. Why is this thing
going in a circle? I'm getting dizzy.
[music]
>> A Tesla, believed to be on autopilot,
started braking causing an eight-car
[music] pileup.
>> Or will it be less human and less free?
>> Never get fatigued. Never get bored.
>> Is driving [music] the next great
culture war battlefield?
>> I don't want a human anymore. I want a
Waymo.
>> The car should be driven by a person.
>> Like it or not,
they're here.
>> My guest this week is a transportation
expert [music] who thinks that self
driving cars absolutely are the future.
But the choices we make [music] right
now will determine whether that future
is a driving utopia
or a traffic nightmare.
>> [music]
>> Andrew Miller, welcome to Interesting
Times.
>> Thank you. It's a pleasure to be here.
>> So, I want you to start by giving me a
sales pitch for self driving cars.
Explain why people might welcome them.
What would be good about a self driving
future?
>> So, we can approach this from the micro
or the macro level. At the the macro
level, 40,000 Americans die every year
in road incidents. And that is only
those who died. It excludes those who
suffer life altering injuries.
None of those need to happen. And the
vast vast majority of those are caused
by driver error.
So, at scale, the more automated driving
there is, the safer the roads are, the
safer Americans are, the safer anyone
who uses the roads are.
But at a micro level,
uh not just safety,
driving is an immense consumer of
people's attention. They have to give or
they should give their full attention to
the road. If they don't
>> yes. That's the goal. That's the
ambition.
>> If they don't, we get more of those road
incidents that I was describing. But,
what it allows you to do is it unlocks
vast reservoirs of attention, hundreds
of millions of hours
every year that Americans would get back
for
other things. And you know, as a good
liberal, I don't prescribe a vision of
the good life, whether they want to play
Candy Crush or whether they want to read
the New York Times. There's any number
of things that they could do, but they
can't right now because they must pay
attention to the road.
It will be a huge liberation of time and
attention, which can lead to so many
good things.
>> When would you expect
on the current trajectory, self-driving
cars, automated driving to become a
normal part of life in lots and lots of
North American cities?
>> I like to It's not so much a joke, it's
a wry observation that around this time
last year, I could name every city that
Waymo is operating in from memory cuz
there were so few. Sometime late last
summer, that stopped being true. I
believe they've announced plans to be in
more than 15 cities. Their footprint in
each of those cities is small,
but they're going to grow quickly.
So, it really depends on how fast
Waymo can scale and how fast their two
big competitors, Zoox and Tesla, can
scale. So,
let's say
I'm always wary of making predictions
because this field is so rife with
hucksters and charlatans who make
predictions, but if I
>> It's an occupational hazard of
podcasting, though. That So, a general
prediction.
>> Uh
it's going to be
10 years is a good anchoring thing,
2035.
>> 2035, then the normal North American
city will have a large fleet of
self-driving
taxis, most likely. They'll be mostly
taxis in this scenario.
>> Yes.
>> Okay. Why is this accelerating and
taking off now? We've been hearing about
self-driving cars for as long as I've
been an adult.
Is it connected just directly to the AI
revolution? What's the
you know, what's the big push at this
moment?
>> It is it's partially connected to the AI
revolution. The AI revolution is making
some of the problems that were
associated with iterating the technology
easier to solve, but I mean Google has
been working on this since the first
decade of the century.
And the reason that Google's been
working on it and others have been
working on it, the reason that Elon Musk
thinks that self-driving is the future
is because rather like generative AI,
teaching a car how to drive is very
expensive initially, but once you know
how to do it, it is very, very cheap to
copy. And then because it is a shared
vehicle as opposed to a privately owned
vehicle, a robo-taxi can be used as much
as many hours a day as you can keep it
clean and you know, charged. So, it can
just spit out money for you endlessly
every hour, every day, every week. So,
the from a business point of view, it's
it's a wonderful business to be in if
you can spend enough money to get to the
point where you have a safe and reliable
product.
>> How much of an obstacle is serious bad
weather to this kind of technology right
now?
>> So,
one way to look at it is is that if
humans can drive in bad weather, a
machine can. The question of how they do
it depends on which technology stack you
are thinking of. So, the Waymo approach
relies on the consensus of the field
that for a self-driving car to know,
I'll put that in quotes, know where it
is, it has to rely on a variety of
senses. So, you Ross, you can see, but
you can also smell, you can also taste.
The Waymo view is a self-driving car
should be able to see with its cameras,
it should see with its radar, it should
see with its lidar. Lidar, think of like
radar, but it's with light. It shoots
out lasers and then it measures how long
it takes to
get the get the measurement back so it
can know with great fidelity where
everything is in space around the
vehicle to
tens of meters. So,
if you have a car that's got all of
these modes, then it can
you know, rain might occlude a sensor
case sensor,
snow might confuse lidar, but the radar
works. So, the more sensing modes you
have, the more expensive your car is,
the harder it is to scale up your
operations cuz every car costs so much,
but the more reliable it is in a variety
of conditions.
Tesla is making a big bet that you don't
need any of that. Tesla thinks you can
do it all with cameras, and if they're
right, that gives them a huge advantage
because cameras are very, very cheap.
So, Tesla
if once they start rolling out their
cyber cab, they will be able to produce
vehicles in vast amounts and so reach
scale very quickly. But, it's not clear
that that approach is as safe because it
doesn't have the same sensors, and it's
not clear that they have got the same
skill of programming behind them that
Waymo does. So, it's very much an open
contest between these two, which is
going to win.
>> So, the limiting factor on
Tesla
potentially right now is safety, and the
limiting factor on Waymo is cost.
And then the presumption is that
essentially in the same way that Uber
lost tons and tons of money for an
extended period of time,
but that was okay because everyone
assumed they would make money
eventually.
This is the same kind of arc, right?
>> Yeah, it took Waymo a big investment to
get this far, but they are so far ahead
and they've got such a great record.
They're going to be very difficult to
catch. Um
so, yeah, I wished I wished Tesla all
the best in this contest. I think
they're going to need it.
>> So, you've got mid-2030s as a zone where
it's as normal to hail a self-driving
car in an American city as it is to hail
an Uber right now, let's say.
At what point does this become part of
people's transportation reality
outside cities, whether as a kind of
suburban phenomenon, the way Uber is
right now, or you know, is there a
self-driving future in the near term for
rural America?
>> Uh the rural case is easy to answer. No.
Uh just like Uber isn't a big thing in
rural America now.
>> Right.
>> My take is is that the American suburb
is actually a good bet for uh robotaxis.
If you can get robotaxis cheap enough,
there's enough demand in the suburbs to
make it work, particularly because the
way that we've designed the North
American suburb since Levittown, it is
really hard to retrofit those for public
transit. Whereas robotaxis, it is
entirely possible that the suburbs get
them, but what it does is is your local
suburb pays
uh some sort of stipend to a robotaxi
company to offset the cost of doing
business in that, and that makes the
economics profitable. So, I can
absolutely see this being something that
would work in the American suburb, but
it may require us to uh put aside 20th
century ideas of what a public transit
agency is.
>> And so then in that scenario, people in
the suburbs are using them for
commuting? Are is there a carpooling?
Like, what is the culture of
self-driving car use look like in that
scenario?
>> Well, now you get into an interesting
question because there's there's two
schools of thought. There is the
transport planning professionals school,
and then there's everybody else's
school, the average American school.
The transport planning professional
says, "Look, roads are fixed finite
space. There's only so many cars that
can fit them. This is an asset we have
to use efficiently. Therefore, we should
have shared vehicles. Just like we get
20 people on a bus, we should have
multiple people in every robotaxi or
shuttle bus. You'll get more more use of
that road. Everyone will have more
efficient trips."
>> [snorts]
>> And then the average American says, "Go
pound sand. I like being alone. I like
my privacy. I don't want to share my
space with strangers. I'm going to be in
a robotaxi alone, and if you won't let
me do that, then I will just buy my own
car, and it can drive me around." So,
the question is how we thread that
needle between what a planning future of
efficient use and the overwhelming
revealed preference.
>> Again, in this
extremely hypothetical and contingent
timeline,
when is it normal for people to have
their own self-driving car available for
purchase that's not part of a taxi
fleet? You just are going You just like,
"I'm going to buy a car, and of course
it's going to be a self-driving car
because why wouldn't I want that
capacity?"
>> [snorts]
>> The The trick there is uh liability.
You can imagine a world where like
Tesla's going all in on complete
self-driving, but the conventional
automakers, your VWs and your Fords and
particularly your GMs,
they would love for you to have
uh every year that's that driving assist
gets more and more sophisticated. The
steering wheel never goes away, but it
can handle more and more of your daily
driving until
yeah, in 10, 12 years, you could imagine
if we solve the liability issue, it can
be doing your driving almost all the
time.
Uh there's no reason a privately owned
vehicle, if you're willing to pay for
it, can't have all of these
uh sensor systems to make it work.
Uh
and if Waymo leads the charge and makes
lidar rigs uh incredibly cheap,
everyone's going to pile on that.
>> What level of self-driving is available
in Teslas right now?
>> So, I drive a Tesla personally. Um
you hear a lot about these levels, level
three, level four, level five. Uh I
think that that sort of language is
misleading. All you need to understand
about self-driving is
does it require a human to be actively
monitoring the situation or does it not?
>> Right. You get in the backseat and it
goes.
>> But if I turn on autopilot in my
privately owned Tesla, I need to be
keeping my foot on the brake and my
hands on the wheel and my eyes on the
road at all times.
The car can handle most situations, but
some it can't and it's my responsibility
to intervene in those cases.
A Tesla at its most sophisticated level
can not only
uh you can plug in your destination and
it will take you to the road, it'll take
you at the speed limit or more than the
speed limit if you tell it to. You're in
the center of the lane, it'll make
turns, it'll stop. Uh it'll even change
lanes for you.
>> And what are you doing when you say you
have to keep your hands and feet active
while it's doing all this? What are you
doing with them? Are you just hovering
over the brake and the steering wheel
until
a large bison stampedes across the road?
>> Exactly. You don't have to do anything,
but you have to, as they said on The
Simpsons once, maintain yourself in a
state of cat-like readiness in case
something happens. There was a time I
was using my autopilot. I was traveling
in a part of my town I didn't know very
well. Uh and it wanted to take me down a
private road, which was sealed off by a
chain hung between two posts. And it
took me at it at full speed. And I was
curious, so I was willing to wait to see
how close it would get.
I broke before it did. I had to slam on
the brakes before we hit the chain, but
it was a near run thing.
>> But so we don't know, basically, how
good Tesla self-driving is going to be.
You can't generalize from what the cars
can do right now. We are essentially
waiting to see
what their emergent taxi fleet looks
like.
>> Well, they are operating in Austin right
now. And they've been operating in
Austin for uh more than half a year now.
And we have some safety data. And it is
the the
how you feel about what Tesla's
reporting has been will depend on what
standard you're holding it to. Uh
[snorts]
most of the time, it works just fine. Uh
but Waymos have no safety operators in
them. There's no human controlling the
vehicle in the vehicle.
Tesla does.
>> In In Austin.
>> In Austin. And those safety drivers have
to intervene an awful lot. So so far, uh
>> [snorts]
>> the the the safety record of Tesla is
not nearly what Waymo's was when it was
at this stage of its journey. But I
mean, it's always tough in early days.
Will they be able to get better? Uh
I hope so, but they've got to do it
quickly.
>> How autonomous
are the cars really? In the sense you
already mentioned that Tesla, you know,
has these interventions, right? It's
like how you're you're assessing the
car's safety or reliability, depending
on how often a a human sitting in it has
to intervene. Waymo doesn't have humans
sitting in them, but there are still
interventions for Waymos, right?
>> There are.
>> What does What does that look like?
>> So,
we we learned about this because Waymo
was called to the Senate to testify.
>> Are all of these human operators located
in the United States? Are they all here?
>> No, we have some in the US and some
abroad.
>> So, how does that break down? What
percent are abroad?
>> Um Senator, I don't have that number for
you. I We can get back to you.
>> Is it a majority are abroad?
>> Um I just don't have that number.
>> Well, that's very curious that someone
who's running the program has no idea.
>> So, we
we got a little inside look at this.
Waymo says that what they have is remote
assistance. So, what that means is is
that it is not like someone playing a
video game where they've got a fake
steering wheel in front of them and they
jack into the car and then drive it and
then jack out and the car computer takes
over.
>> [snorts]
>> Uh it's more like laying digital
breadcrumbs. The car isn't sure what to
do. It encounters a situation that is
confusing to it because
there's a bunch of traffic cones, but a
few of them are knocked over and that's
sufficiently unusual that the car is not
uncertain. So, it calls a human remote
assistant who looks at it and says, "Oh,
it's safe to proceed. Just don't knock
over that cone." Uh or even go so far as
to say, "Here is I can see on your map,
go to point A, then go to point B, then
go to point C, and at point C you will
no longer be confused."
That's what they call remote assistance.
So,
is that driving?
Uh people have differences of opinions
on this. I say it's not. I say that the
remote assistance is what it says it is.
It's a human providing additional input
to the computer to make its decisions.
Uh but yeah, there there are cases where
the computer cannot figure it out on its
own and it does need help.
>> And the human in that situation, just to
make the case that this is something
more like driving, has the capacity to
direct the car.
>> Right.
>> Yes. It's giving an instruction to the
computer.
>> Right. What is What is the passenger's
capacity to affect
what the self-driving car does once, you
know,
you've bought your fare, it's taking
you, you know, to Fisherman's Wharf or
something, and you think it's doing
something wrong as the passenger.
Is there anything you can do? Can you
stop the car?
>> Well, what you can do is you can press a
button and speak to It's not one of
those remote operators, but you can
speak to a concierge, if I can use that
term, and explain what the situation is,
that there's an emergency or there's
something of concern, and then the
remote operator is able to send messages
to the car.
Uh, the typical thing that we want a
self-driving car to do
in any situation is if it's genuinely if
it's genuinely uncertain or there's a
problem, to reach a safe position, which
normally means pull over to the side of
the road, come to a full and complete
stop, and then wait for further
directions.
There are situations where you can
imagine that would be a bad thing, like
if there's an earthquake.
>> Yep.
>> Um,
but [snorts]
but, uh, under normal circumstances,
that's the that's what it does. So,
you've got limited ability to you you
can't override, but you can talk to a
human who has some capacity to override.
>> But presumably, the human-owned
self-driving car of 2035
would be sold with essentially a human
override, right? It would be unlikely
that people would be buying
self-driving cars
that didn't promise that you can take
control of this thing.
>> That That would you I so.
>> I would I would so. I'm just trying to
envision
>> But
>> plays out.
>> But Mr. Musk has said there is an
absolute market for people to buy a car
with that is entirely self-driving. It
doesn't have a human interface. So, is
he right? If he If he's If If what he
says comes to pass, we'll be able to
test your hypothesis within months.
>> Interesting.
Okay, that definitely cuts against my
own intuitions.
Let's talk about liability.
>> Mhm.
>> Which you've already mentioned as
a bigger issue than cost in terms of
making
personal sales commercially viable.
Would you say that?
>> I would say it is the single issue that
is most in need of clarity that we need
to to solve cuz it's what's going to
hold back this sector if we don't.
>> Okay, so why is it such a hard issue if,
as you suggested at the outset of the
conversation,
these cars will be so much safer?
>> Well, from my point of view, there
shouldn't be. We should take
manufacturers at their word, and we
should say to them,
uh, you know, classic American fashion,
put up or shut up. If you think that
this is so safe, you assume 100% of the
liability. If there's an incident while
the what we call the ADS, the automated
driving system, is in control, and it is
later shown that the ADS is at fault,
then you've got You've got to take on
the liability.
I think that is a clear bright line. I
think it's very, uh, it's
easy to argue for, it would be easy to
implement, and it would be If we had
that, we would be able to move forward
very clearly. The problem is there is
reluctance among the car makers to live
up to that standard, and that's a
problem.
>> What What is Waymo's liability right
now? If you get hit by a Waymo taxi in
LA, who who is liable?
>> Well, it's, uh,
Waymo is.
So, it's
>> So, they've accepted it for their for
their current fleet.
>> Yeah. So, Waymo has done so.
Uh
Tesla, I think to their discredit, has
suggested that they might not want to uh
certainly with regards to their uh
driver assist systems,
they've been reluctant to assert that
responsibility uh because I think the
potential for lawsuits is so vast. They
are trying to protect themselves.
And what I think regulators need to do
is say, "You need to have the courage of
your convictions. So, we're going to
hold you to that standard. We're going
to insist upon it."
>> But, this is a
pretty pretty radically different setup,
right? Than the entire liability setup
we have right now.
>> Yeah.
Liability is tricky. Um the American
liability is based on the idea that no
consumer can hope to stand up to a big
company. So, we put all of the weight in
legal proceedings
uh on the customer's side. And that's
led to a jurisprudential culture, if I
can use that word, where the cost of
getting anything wrong from a
manufacturer's side is vast. It's
existentially vast. So, I told you
earlier that there were three big
companies in this space. There's Waymo,
there's Zoox, and there's Tesla. There
used to be a fourth. It was called
Cruise, uh and it was an arm of General
Motors.
So, it was involved in an accident a few
years ago where uh someone hit someone
who was jaywalking, and they threw the
human jaywalker into the path of a
Cruise vehicle, which uh
ran them over. And then the Cruise
vehicle, because it didn't know what to
do, it moved to the safe position. It
pulled to the stop, dragging that poor
unfortunate soul with them. And
they weren't killed, but they they were
severely injured.
Uh that was
>> So, their injury was much worse because
of
>> The car was
>> Because because the car did the extra
thing.
>> Yeah, a human driver would never have
made that mistake. A human
>> driver might have hit the person, but
wouldn't have dragged them.
>> Yeah.
>> A responsible human driver, I think,
would absolutely have hit them, but
would have known there was a human under
the car and would have stayed put, but
the car didn't have a sensor underneath
and by dragging that person exacerbated
their injuries. That incident ended up
killing the company. It was uh not just
the lawsuit, but the they they were a
bit squarely with the regulators who
removed their license to operate, and
General Motors said, "We can't fund this
anymore." So, it all got shut down. One
incident. So, I understand why the firms
are being very
uh gun-shy
of assuming liability here, but we need
to insist upon it.
>> But, does that mean that essentially you
are you have to achieve not just
a higher level of safety than a human
driver, but some extraordinarily higher
level because you will be liable in the
way that a normal auto manufacturer
wouldn't be?
>> So, regula- because this is a new
technology, regulators are absolutely
holding a self-driving car to a much
higher standard than a human piloted or
human operated car.
Uh
some people find that
obnoxious, which is like you're you'd
save lives on net. As soon as it's
better than average, let it rip because
you'd be saving lives on net.
That's [snorts] not how lawmakers think.
They don't think about like how do we
get the best outcomes on net? We get a
situation of like no one can be blamed.
Um so, it they insist that it's got to
be
as safe as reasonably possible, like
what an engineer calls six nines,
99.9999.
Uh I don't think that's an unreasonable
standard. Sure, it's going to slow down
reaching scale with these things,
but there is so much
distrust of Big Tech and of self-driving
cars generally.
Uh, I think that the appropriate
strategy of going slow, being safe, and
insist showing that what you are you're
not harmful and you're not cavalier is
so important if we're going to get the
good outcomes that I think this
technology can give us.
>> So, in practice,
how many people could a self-driving
fleet kill to be viable, would you say?
Is it like one?
>> Well, I mean, it's important to note
that one Cruise incident and that was a
severe injury, it wasn't a death.
Uh, there
>> Right, but there are very few
self-driving cars on the road. Even I
mean, they're in many cities, they're
coming, et cetera, right? But we're not
talking about
millions and millions of cars or
hundreds of thousands of cars, right?
We're talking about a small number.
>> Yeah.
But, what we have is courtesy of the
state of California, and I hope this is
something that the federal government
uh, they're being encouraged to adopt
it. I hope they do. There are very
strong transparency requirements. So, we
know about every incident that a Waymo's
been involved in, and we've combed
through them, and we know that Waymo is
safer than human drivers already. Uh,
you could argue the denominator isn't
there compared to the hundreds of
millions of miles that humans drive in
the United States every year versus the
the relatively small fleet. So, we can't
know,
but looking at where that data is coming
from, like, uh, San Francisco is not an
easy city to drive in. Like, it is a
complex environment. If it's achieving
safety there,
I find it hard to believe that it would
find um,
Topeka
uh, to be a much more difficult place to
work.
>> But, I I just want to stay with sort of
the weirdness factor for a minute, cuz I
think that's that's an important hurdle
here for people. Again, in the example
that you gave of the cruise disaster, it
was the car doing a weird inhuman thing
after it hit someone, right? Um, and
you know, and and there are, you know,
there have been other examples, right,
where, um,
Tesla's in autopilot mode were involved
in similar accidents in Florida, where
they collided with the side of white
tractor trailers crossing highways,
right? Because their cameras, as I
understand it, just couldn't see the
white against the sky. Again, not it's
it's not the kind of accident that human
beings are used to getting into, right?
And I just wonder, like, isn't isn't
that part of the hurdle that people will
have to get over to accept these cars
that when you do have accidents, it's
not just the number of accidents, it's
that when they do happen, they will feel
weirder and more random, maybe, than
just like, you know, a guy running a red
light and hitting someone.
>> Well, I was I was writing about this on
my newsletter that Waymo had an incident
a few months back where they killed a
bodega cat in San Francisco. You're
right. I I I would a human have made
that mistake? I'm not sure. But, every
time one of these vehicles makes a
mistake, we notice it and be because
it's an inhuman thing,
uh, where we're used to only having
human activity, it does weird us out. It
does make us nervous. Uh, so,
regulators, I think are responding to
that, and the to Waymo's credit and
Zoox's credit, they're moving slowly and
carefully to avoid sparking concern that
we're we've unleashed robots on our
streets that are unaccountable. They
don't want us to think about it that
way.
>> Right. Uh and there there was a case in
Santa Monica where a child was hit, not
killed, right? And in that case
I think Waymo said, well,
a human driver would have been much more
likely to hit her at a higher speed,
right? And Waymo successfully the Waymo
car successfully braked
at a speed a human driver wouldn't have,
right? But I'm not sure if that applies
to this case, but you could imagine a
scenario right where
a Waymo enters a crowded area and
drives faster than a normal human would
because it isn't picking up on sort of
weirder things going on in that area.
Like maybe there's, you know, a fire in
a building and everyone is slowing down
to rubberneck. And the Waymo doesn't see
it, but then it successfully slams on
the brakes. It's like a different way of
seeing the road.
>> So the the thing that to say about that
is just like other kinds of
sophisticated AI systems, uh
data is what it needs. I can only
speculate that the Santa Monica incident
happened cuz it was insufficiently aware
that at this particular time of day near
a school, it should be behaving even
more cautiously than normal.
Well, it knows that now. Uh so we'll
have fewer incidents like this. Every
month that passes, the data sets of all
these companies get richer. These sorts
of incidents should get fewer. Uh
which is another reason why what? It's I
approve of the strategy of going slow
and being humble and being safe because
that's where we That's how we win.
That's how we thread this needle.
>> Is there a self-driving car equivalent
of like a chat GPT hallucination?
Like are there scenarios where the car
just does something and you can't you
don't know why it did it?
>> Oh, absolutely. I mean, you can find
videos on YouTube if you've got the
stomach for it of uh a
Tesla because they've got the most
sophisticated driver assist systems
where it's just moving along in the
lane, then does a hard left and goes
right off through opposing traffic and
then right off the road.
And you you struggle in vain to know
what possibly encouraged it to do that.
So, it does happen uh just like
hallucinations with ChatGPT,
they're getting better all the time, but
it's not perfect. So,
again, if I was a regulator, I would say
given this scenario,
if you're going to operate in public
spaces, you had certainly better stand
100% behind it because otherwise
it'd be it'd be irresponsible.
>> And what what are the political
obstacles to
sort of universal universal Waymo?
>> It's interesting cuz it does scramble
traditional Democrat Republican
right-left lines.
Uh on the one side, uh you've got uh
you've got labor interests and you've
got uh you've got Democratic lawmakers
who are sensitive to
sensitive to labor concerns, wanted to
go slow, but you've also got Democratic
lawmakers who are sensitive to the
plight of the most vulnerable and they
identify Uber drivers as one of those
classes that is worthy of protection.
But on the other hand, you also have
people who are concerned about spying.
Um the nature of a modern vehicle and
certainly a self-driving car,
as we've already talked about it, it's
got sensors going all the time. It's
collecting data of everywhere it goes
all the time.
Uh
who has access to that data? Certainly
the operator of the vehicle, the Waymos
or the Teslas or the Zooxs of this world
do.
And that means that a sufficiently
motivated bad actor
could get them as well.
Or uh I mean, General Motors, you with
conventional vehicles, was selling all
the data of everyone driving a GM car
onto third parties, arguing that well,
we collected this data, it's ours now,
we can sell it.
So, with a Waymo or a self-driving car,
it's so much richer, there's so much
more potential for data capture, and so
civil libertarians and people national
security concerns have got
Well, they've got questions.
>> And in terms of
security, so how much
like
fears of terrorism, for instance, right?
Like, someone who used super-intelligent
AI to hack into Waymo's system
would presumably have the capacity to
take over
hundreds or thousands of cars at once,
right? Is that
That's it just in terms of scenarios
that people are reasonably afraid of.
>> So, in that scenario, yeah, certainly
the advent of LLMs means that we've got
we've unleashed super hacking.
>> [snorts]
>> The The two points to make are as one, I
don't you'd have to hack you couldn't
control every car, you'd have to hack
into everyone. And as previously
mentioned, the car's driving itself, so
you'd need to find a very sophisticated
way to confuse the car about its
environment. I don't I know technical
expert, I think it could be done, but I
think it'd be really hard to do.
Which leads to the second point, which
is in the language of security,
Waymo is a hard target. They've got all
the cybersecurity behind them. If I was
a bad actor, America's power grids,
America's utilities, there are so many
softer targets out there where you can
do more havoc with less effort. I'm not
going to say more.
>> That's true. No, that's true. Well, we
don't we don't want to like sketch out,
you know,
terrorist plans on this show, but I do
think there's a connection to these
psychological elements that I'm
interested in where
like the the idea of having the
automobile you're in
be taken over is because it's unfamiliar
and novel and tied to sort of personal
privacy and personal control
in a way just seems like a more
terrorizing act than a blackout and
people have lived through blackouts
before.
The novelty
>> movie The opening The opening of the new
Naked Gun movie features a murder
committed with a self-driving car as the
weapon. There's a long history of this
in our popular culture. Like this is a
obvious place for our fears go to. So
you're on to something that this is
weird and strange but in a way that sort
of triggers us to be afraid.
>> So then how
does
the sale happen, right? Like
when we started this conversation you
made a very strong case that
there's these huge benefits, right? In
terms of just a much much safer road.
>> Yeah.
>> But that accumulates
slowly and in patchwork and you don't
have the data for a while or a long
time. Most people don't get into car
accidents as a regular thing, right?
It's like it's a it's a rare thing. As
many car accidents as there are in the
US, most people go through a year or 5
years without getting in one, right? So
how do you as an advocate for this
technology or some version of this
technology you see it getting over the
hump of different forms of public
resistance?
>> So
if you watch Mad Men, in the first
season of Mad Men,
Don Draper, there's an elevator operator
that takes you up from the lobby up to
the Sterling Cooper offices.
By the end of this there's no elevator
operator within a few years because
yeah, the elevator operators were on
their way out in the mid-60s. Uh I am
sure the first time someone rode in an
automatic elevator where they just
pressed a button and then it whisked
them to their floor without a human
there to intervene, it felt strange.
But I imagine the fifth time it
happened, it didn't feel strange at all.
That's certainly the everyone's reported
experience with uh Waymos and similar
self-driving cars. The first time you do
it, it's either eerie or magical. The
second time you do it,
you don't notice. You pull out your
phone and you're doing whatever it is
that you're doing on that. And it's just
like someone is driving. You pay no
attention to it any more than you pay
attention to your Uber.
So, [snorts] one of the advantages of
Waymo introducing very small fleets but
into many cities is to inoculate us
against this idea that it is strange.
So, the more people that get to ride
even once, it will the spell will be
broken. And we'll see it as oh, of
course, this is driving something a
machine should be good at. Why shouldn't
I have a machine do it? And that's the
world, as you've alluded to, which will
be safer.
Uh
but it requires us to be comfortable
with it. So, I hope that everyone
listening to this podcast, the next time
they are perhaps uh traveling for
business or pleasure in a city where
Waymo or Zoox or Tesla is operating,
tries it out. And I think they will see
that this is uh like they say about
other AI, just another technology, a
normal boring technology.
>> Normal and boring, right.
Give me then, go forward from that. Give
me the good timeline because
you're an optimist about this tech, but
you have a couple of different scenarios
for the future, one of which is better
than the other.
>> Yep.
>> So, give me the good scenario for 2035
and beyond, the way this technology gets
adopted and how the world changes.
>> So, the good scenario would be Waymo and
Zoox and Tesla have all, despite their
different approaches, they've all
reached scale, so there's healthy
competition in the robo-taxi market in
every major metro.
Uh
everyone is using them.
It's 40% to 50% less costly, which means
that you travel more or you've got more
discretionary income to spend on other
things.
Uh
people are giving up their cars. Uh
every household that used to own two
cars in an urban environment now owns
one. Every household that owned one car
now owns none. They use robo-taxis to
fulfill the space of one of those cars.
Consequently,
uh we've got less need for
parking. We've got all the parking
infrastructure and parking space can be
re
re-returned to other uses, higher and
better uses than just vehicle storage.
And people are safer, fewer people are
dying in road incidents, and they get a
certain number of hours back every week
that they can put to whatever purposes
they they want to. They've got their So,
they are richer, but they're also freer
in the sense they can more
exercise those different parts of
themselves.
>> And there's less pollution. Or less
lower energy costs. We haven't talked
about
energy [snorts] and climate change much,
but that's part of the story, too,
right?
>> Every automated vehicle in development
that I'm aware of is electric. So, to
the extent that you want to see a
transition away from internal combustion
engine cars, which I do, then that's a
better world, too. Yes, there's going to
be more demand for electricity, but it
seems that that's going to happen
because of AI
no matter what happens in this sector,
so we'll have to solve that problem
anyway.
>> And well, and in your good scenario,
there's people own fewer cars,
everything is more efficient, people are
more accustomed maybe to sharing cars
and so on. So, there might even be less
electricity used.
>> Could be.
>> I think the Jevons paradox suggests that
we'll just use more
>> just use more. Yes, that's true. The
car, if it's cheaper, we'll use more of
it.
Okay, well, that's a good bridge to
what's the bad scenario.
Again, where self-driving cars spread
and become ubiquitous,
but the outcome isn't as happy for
society.
>> Uh congestion is much worse. Trip times
get longer.
Uh if you're sitting there playing Candy
Crush, maybe you don't notice, but pity
the poor soul who doesn't have access to
this and has to drive, and their their
driving gets worse all the time.
It's easy to imagine a world where we
have enough Waymos to really increase
congestion, but not enough to really put
a dent in private car ownership, so it
isn't rational on the margin to get rid
of a lot of parking. So, we have more
congestion, but we don't get to reclaim
space.
But, worse than that, uh
public transit goes into a death spiral
because
in a world where robotaxis make ride
hail half the cost that it is now, you
get so many people defecting to
robotaxis, which means that public
transit gets worse, and at the same time
that it costs more money to operate, and
more and more cities can't afford it, so
they pull back, leading to a greater
defection to robotaxis. So, people that
cannot afford even cheaper robotaxi
fares,
um and now have a worse transit
experience or no transit experience. So,
they have experience less mobility.
Uh
that's a bad world, and in many ways
it's worse than the one we live in now.
>> So, what is the fundamental place where
the fork happens?
>> Um
I would say there's two inflection
points, and they're related to one
another. The good scenario depends on
Waymo being available quickly and
cheaply to everyone. If there's a hard
cap on the number of Waymos, you don't
get there. So, regulators need to be
willing to say, "No, a future where
you know, every other car is a robo-taxi
is a good thing and they don't try to
prevent that outcome."
And so, I say it's related because the
other side of it is what do public
transit agencies do? Do they see
robo-taxis as the enemy that has to be
kept out or do they
you go with, you know, what they called
the 20th century, the soft embrace and
say, "We're going to bring these in."
Uh we don't run long feeder buses
anymore that come twice an hour and take
35 minutes to get to the nearest hub.
Instead, we replace that with
we own some robo-taxis or we license
some robo-taxis and anyone can get a
robo-taxi trip that takes them to or
from the nearest higher order station.
So, we begin to bring automated driving
into our transit. Our buses
>> Buses would be robo-buses, right?
>> Yeah. Uh
that is going That's a really hard road
to hoe because public transit agencies
are some of the most unionized
environments in this country.
Uh
they're going to see this as a threat to
their livelihoods, which it is. So, what
I hope we can do then is instead of
we shouldn't just throw them out en
masse. I'm a transit advocate. I want
there to be good transit systems, but I
also want transit to have benefit of the
best technology available. If that means
doing a big buyout package one time, we
should do that. We should take that
deal, but it might be a hard sell in an
era of limited budgets.
I don't know. I think there's going to
be so much money to be made on the
robo-taxi side that there's got to be
some sort of deal that can be made to
make some of the people who are going to
lose out whole.
>> So,
those obstacles to the better future
that you've just sketched are kind of
left-coded.
They're obstacles associated with
regulatory environments in big cities,
with how mass transit works, things like
that.
I'm also interested in obstacles to your
happy future though that might be sort
of right coded, right? And above all,
the willingness of people in a country
like the United States to actually
own substantially fewer cars. Because it
seems like your good future depends on
that, too, right? It's not just people
are willing to take robo taxis, Waymos,
and so on. It's also that as they get
willing to do that, they just decide
they don't need to have their own car
available. And and that does, I think,
pretty clearly cut against
cultural and behavioral norms in a place
like the United States, right?
>> Well, now, we've seen in urban spaces
because it is owning a car
uh in a place like Manhattan is such a
pain in the neck, most more and more
younger people are choosing to forgo a
car and they're not even getting
driver's licenses. There are always
going to be people who want to own their
own car.
I think young parents will always want
their own car to move their kids around.
Um you know, workers like who they're
going to want tools to carry from the
job, they're going to want their own
vehicle to do that. The objective is not
a world where no one doesn't It's just
where you don't need to own as many as
you do now.
>> How is it sustainable though
to have that kind of sort of persistent
car private car ownership
if self-driving
is so much safer
than regular driving. Like we talked
earlier about the challenge of liability
and how figuring out liability
is how, you know, how you figure this
out. But isn't there a certain point
where that issue flips and everyone
looks around and says, "My god, you
know, a Waymo is a thousand times safer
than Ross Douthat behind the wheel of a
Toyota Sienna, right? Terror terror of,
you know, greater New Haven and
therefore my insurance premiums for
owning a Toyota Sienna that I need to
fill with, you know, gear for my
oversized family go up and up and up and
effectively
non-self-driving starts getting priced
out. Isn't that
isn't that a plausible corollary of your
optimistic for self-driving future?
>> I think it is a plausible corollary
corollary. I don't think it's in the
near or even the medium term,
but this century,
assuming we don't have some sort of
catastrophe, could that happen?
Absolutely, it could. But I think it
would be so gradual because, you know,
Tesla's ambitions aside, I think private
cars are going to have steering wheels
for decades to come.
They're just going to have sophisticated
driver assist systems or even
self-driving, but only in
like
only on the highway.
Uh I think what will happen is is that
you will be expected to use such systems
when you can and if you choose not to
and you get an accident, your insurance
might say, "Well, our policy says that
you have to rely on the systems in
situations where it's appropriate." So,
it's not going to go away overnight.
It'll be incremental. Um and I still
think that's to the good as those
systems get better and better. When once
it reaches the point where it can drive
better than us in all scenarios, why
wouldn't we want that?
Let's talk about that. Do you like to
drive?
>> I cannot say that I do.
>> Okay.
I like to drive. I'm not a car person,
right? I don't I've never like bought an
old car and tinkered with it and I'm not
any kind of like car brand fanatic. I
drive, as I said, minivans right now,
but I have always enjoyed driving. It
was a pretty big deal to me learning to
drive in the middle of my teens as both
sort of
an assertion of independence, separation
from parents, and also just as kind of a
way of
understanding and mastering the world,
like a kind of step into
adulthood. Um and this is, you know,
it is distinctively American in certain
ways, uh but it's American in a way that
fits our geography. We're a big country
where there's lots of places where mass
transit doesn't work, and driving has
always made sense. It makes sense that
we have this kind of culture and this
form of, um
sort of
adult being in the world
isn't something
lost if that is all given up?
>> Well, some of what is lost is what
you've just described. The the It is a
very American thing, the romance of the
road, freedom, independence, the ability
to go where you want and be in control
of it.
Uh there's another angle to it. We don't
have in contemporary liberal, uh you
know, liberal America, rights of passage
for young people
anymore. I mean, we don't have many of
them. One of them used to be learning to
drive. It was a sign that you're an
adult. We trust you with this very
dangerous piece of machinery. Um and
when you can do it, we know you know
that you have arrived. And it's also,
you know, what uh I suppose the
philosopher would call embodied
knowledge. You aren't just a brain,
you're also moving this thing, and so
you have to pay attention. You've got to
have good reflexes.
These are valuable things. And yeah, we
are on track to see them
probably not in our lifetimes, but
sometimes in this century, we're we're
on track to see them disappear, uh or
become very minor.
>> That's And there's our I mean, we should
I should state the driver's license as
right of passage phenomenon has already
weakened in parts of the United States.
And, you know, you it's sort of a famous
part of the larger story of American
teenagers being more risk-averse and you
know, going around less in the age of
the iPhone, right? That teens are more
likely to postpone getting their
license, right? That's already
diminished to some degree. So, you can
sort of fold this story into
the larger story of the kind of
screenification,
safety-focused screenification, right?
Of American youth.
>> And bigger than that, like the the death
of embodied knowledge, where it's not
just screenification, it's like when I
I'm a writer, which means I spend most
of my time looking at a screen and
writing. I'm not working with my hands.
But, that's the trend not just of youth,
that's the trend of American life,
right? Uh so, we need to solve this
somehow, but it shouldn't be regarded as
a the special burden of
our cars to solve it for us. We need
rights of passage, we need more
opportunities to live in our bodies and
and learn embodied skills, but let's not
say that we're going to draw the line at
driving cars. That seems the wrong place
to draw it when they can offer us so
many offsetting benefits.
>> What
But, what is the right place to draw it?
It just It just seems like
people are going to say that about every
step along the road to
disembodied existence, right? Because at
every stage
you're going to say, "Well, you know,
this new this new situation is much more
efficient. It's much safer. You know,
you you don't want your kid to die in a
car accident." Obviously, I don't want
my kid to die in a car accident, but
that that sales pitch is going to be
true for
any form of embodied knowledge, right?
Doesn't embodied knowledge by its nature
contain risk and
and peril? Isn't that what embodiment is
all about?
>> It absolutely is. And all I can say is
if we want driving to make us
have full and healthy relationships to
the world and to ourselves, I think
we're asking too much of driving.
You asked me where we should draw the
line, I have to say
I'm not a minister and I'm not a
philosopher, so I can't tell you that.
All I can tell you is is that
if we have a tool that can save lives
while also giving people their time
back,
uh
I think we would be a fool not to pick
it up and then use that time and money
we save to invest that into solving this
problem, but I'm not the one to solve it
for you.
>> But be a political prophet then though
just for a minute.
If the scenario you're describing comes
to pass, wouldn't you expect this to be
potentially just a vast culture war
issue, too? Where you have blue states
in the United States, liberal states,
you know, having one set of insurance
rules for driving your own car and red
states having another sense and you
know, you cross over into the free state
of Montana
and it's a much easier to get a driver's
license or it's much easier to own own a
car. I mean, doesn't it's it seems like
what you're describing is a potential
political cultural fault line that could
actually define American politics in an
interesting way.
>> Oh, yes. I mean, there's there's nothing
Americans can't turn into a culture war
battle if they if they try.
>> That is Well, that's cuz we care. We
care so much, Andrew.
>> But the interesting thing about it is is
that right now it goes the other way,
right? Right now Texas and Tennessee are
much more open to self-driving than blue
states. Like California is a big
exception cuz it's the home of the
industry,
but Washington and Massachusetts and
right here in New York state, there's
much more friction for the arrival of
self-driving cars. So, it seems like
it's
>> No, that's that's that's the fascinating
thing. The libertarian states are, you
know, building the gallows on which
human agency and independence will
eventually be hanged. That seems like a
total possibility.
>> Yeah, that was like, you know, history.
It'll surprise you. The ironies The
ironies run deep.
>> Yes. No, that's a really good point.
Um you live in Toronto. Have you ever
driven to Vancouver?
>> Oh, no. Uh
>> No, no, never?
>> No, I've driven to Montreal several
times. I've driven as far out as as
Halifax. It's several days drive.
>> Several days drive. Okay. Okay. I drove
across the country with my family a few
years ago and, you know,
whenever you do things
in life that you come to with a set of
sort of philosophical priors, obviously,
it tends to confirm them. But
I yeah, I I left that experience feeling
very grateful that I have the right and
the freedom to
get behind the wheel of a car and sort
of steer it over giant vast mountain
ranges and so on. Um
so, really my takeaway from the end of
this conversation is I want to get the
New York Times to pay you
to rent a large American auto-
automobile and drive it from Toronto to
Vancouver and see if it makes you any
more inclined to defend one's God-given
right to drive a car.
>> I'd be happy to I'd be happy to run that
experiment.
>> All right. We'll talk about it
uh off camera. Andrew Miller, thank you
so much for joining me.
>> Well, thank you very much. It's been a
pleasure to be here.